<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>List of Illustrations</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="loi" epub:type="loi">
			<nav epub:type="loi">
				<h2 epub:type="title">List of Illustrations</h2>
				<ol>
					<li>
						<a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#ill-001">A diagram of three triangles, points downwards. They all have the same width, but the second has a smaller height than the first, and the thrid has a smaller height again.</a>
					</li>
					<li>
						<a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#ill-002">A map of a pentagonal house. The corners are marked <var>A</var>, <var>B</var>, <var>R</var>, <var>O</var> and <var>F</var>. The edge between <var>R</var> and <var>A</var> has the men’s door, and the edge between <var>F</var> and <var>B</var> has a smaller women’s door.</a>
					</li>
					<li>
						<a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#ill-003">A diagram showing two shapes and views onto them. The first shape, an equilateral triangle has the near corner to the point of view labelled <var>A</var> and the furthest visible points labelled <var>B</var> and <var>C</var>. Points <var>D</var> and <var>E</var> are level with point <var>A</var> and sit on the lines of sight from the point of view to corners <var>B</var> and <var>C</var>. The second shape is a regular pentagon and has the same points marked (with prime marks) to show that the outside visible points are closer to the point of view than with the triangle.</a>
					</li>
					<li>
						<a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#ill-004">A diagram showing the lines of sight from a position on the right hand side of a hexagon, aligned to have points up and down. The labelled points on the hexagon are <var>A</var> and <var>B</var> on the side visible to the viewpoint, and <var>C</var> and <var>D</var> which show the extent of the hexagon that is visible.</a>
					</li>
					<li>
						<a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#ill-005">A diagram showing the lines of sight from a position on the right hand side of a circle on the left. The labelled points on the circle are <var>M</var> at the top, <var>A</var> on the left directly opposite the point of view, <var>B</var> on the right nearest the point of view, and <var>C</var> and <var>D</var> which describe the visible portion of the front of the circle.</a>
					</li>
					<li>
						<a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#ill-006">A diagram titled “My view of Lineland.” It shows the narrator looking down on an axis, along which can be found women (dots), boys (small dashes), men (longer dashes) and in the middle the king who, being on the line, can only see a point in both directions.</a>
					</li>
					<li>
						<a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#ill-007">A diagram showing Lineland, with the King’s position on the right, and in the middle the narrator’s body just before they disappeared.</a>
					</li>
					<li>
						<a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#ill-008">A diagram showing three states of the Sphere’s intersection with a point of view. This first shows the Sphere with his section at full size, the second shows the Sphere rising with a smaller intersection, and the third the Sphere at the point of vanishing with a tiny intersection.</a>
					</li>
					<li>
						<a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#ill-009">A map of the house, with the locations of rooms and inhabitants marked.</a>
					</li>
					<li>
						<a href="../text/chapter-19.xhtml#ill-010">A diagram showing two cubes; the first is composed from stacked squares, the second is drawn as a solid.</a>
					</li>
					<li>
						<a href="../text/chapter-22.xhtml#ill-ending">The baseless fabric of this vision melted into air, into thin air. Such stuff as dreams are made of. The end of Flatland.</a>
					</li>
				</ol>
			</nav>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
